Add HTTP Trailers extension (#339)
django/asgiref: docs/extensions.rst

---

See :doc:`specs/tls`.

> 

Author: Moving @synodriver's comment to its own thread:

> > I think that multiple http.response.trailers messages is an unnecessary complication
> 
> Actually when you are using [h11](https://pypi.org/project/h11/), there is only one chance to send trailer: at the end of response body. So it's ok for servers which only support http/1.1. But when it comes to http/2, things changed. Mutiple trailers is allowed, and, to be honest, I spend quite a lot time thinking trailers under http/2, and found that may need some [tricky](https://github.com/nonebot/nonecorn/issues/11). I have no idea if it's allowed.

I'm not sure how this has implications in the spec, but I'd like to highlight this comment, as it may get lost.

HTTP Trailers
---

The Trailer response header allows the sender to include additional fields at the
end of chunked messages in order to supply metadata that might be dynamically
generated while the message body is sent, such as a message integrity check,
digital signature, or post-processing status.

ASGI servers that implement this extension will provide
``http.response.trailers`` in the extensions part of the scope::

    "scope": {
        ...
        "extensions": {
            "http.response.trailers": {},
        },
    }

An ASGI framework interested in sending trailing headers to the client, must include

> the ``Trailer`` header in the ``http.response.start``. That will allow the ASGI server

Reviewer: Is the `Trailer` header the same as `TE: trailers` mentioned below? Or should there be an additional field?

Author: No, this `Trailer` header is a response header. The `TE: trailers` below is from the request header.

Example of full interaction:
- The client sends a `TE: trailers` request header.
- The server sends `Trailer: X-Server-Timing` in the response headers.
- Body is sent.
- `X-Server-Timing` is sent as trailing headers.

> the ``Trailer`` header in the ``http.response.start``. That will allow the ASGI server

Reviewer 2: Is the ``trailer`` field in ``http.response.start`` necessary for server implementations？I didn't have that field but nonecorn still works.

Author: How do you make sure that the server will not close the transport without informing that the trailing headers will be available? Making the _last_ `http.response.body` to send `more_body=True`? 🤔

Reviewer 2: >  Making the last http.response.body to send more_body=True

Yes, this is exactly what I am doing.

> I didn't add the trailer field in the http.response.start on this spec. I've mentioned that the Trailer header should be included in the headers field on the http.response.start.

I saw it from [uvicorn's pr](https://github.com/encode/uvicorn/pull/1599/files) which seems to have a trailer field.

Author: > I saw it from [uvicorn's pr](https://github.com/encode/uvicorn/pull/1599/files) which seems to have a trailer field.

I think you didn't see it, but I mentioned on the description of this PR:

> The uvicorn one introduces a new key on the `http.response.start` called `trailers`, to show the intention from the application to the server that trailing headers will be sent. I think this is not needed. The server can understand the intention if the header `Trailing:` is provided on the `headers` from the `http.response.start`.

Author: > Yes, this is exactly what I am doing. And add a filed for that event, like { 'type': 'http.response.trailers', 'trailers': [ [b'x-trailer-test', b'test'], ], "more_body": False }

Got it. But then... The ASGI framework still needs to send the `Trailer` header. So the `more_body` set to `False` on the last `http.response.body` is also not needed, because the server already knows about the `Trailer` header.

Reviewer 2: Actually I didn't look into the headers when I wrote that... So you mean we can improve it by letting server automatically judge from the headers? I just let asgi applications send as they want, no need to add extra headers.

Reviewer 2: Well, according to the RFC, your implementation is more accurate. I will fix that soon. But what will happen if an asgi application wants to send trailers multiple times?

Author: According to https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2616.html#section-14.40:

>  An HTTP/1.1 message SHOULD include a Trailer header field in a
   message using chunked transfer-coding with a non-empty trailer. Doing
   so allows the recipient to know which header fields to expect in the
   trailer.

So it should be included... So I guess, we need to make the server know at the beginning of if it's going to send trailing headers.

Author: > Well, according to the RFC, your implementation is more accurate. I will fix that soon. But what will happen if an asgi application wants to send trailers multiple times?

By this spec, it's not allowed. 🤔 Should it be? By this spec, I'd expect a single `http.response.trailers` message with all the headers in the `headers` (or we can call it `trailers` if wanted) field.

Reviewer 2: I think more than one ```http.response.trailers``` should be possible for some cases, and it's not very hard for server  implementations.

Author: I was writing the changes that I would have to implement if this is the case... So I wrote this:

> If I adjust the spec to allow that, then I'll have to add the following changes in the document:
> - The last `http.response.body` will send `more_body` as `True`.
> - Add `more_body` field to `http.response.trailers`. 
> - The last `http.response.trailers` will send `more_body` as `False`.
> Just to be clear, the ASGI application will still be in charge of sending the `Trailer:` header.

But then I noticed... What if the `Trailer:` header is not sent by the ASGI application? Does the ASGI server waits for all `http.response.trailers`, and does not send those to the client? Does the server closes the transport and then raises an error if `http.response.trailers` are detected without the initial `Trailer:` header?

Reviewer 2: Does the ASGI application need to ensure that the data is sent as required, or does the server have the obligation to check?

Reviewer 2: If the check is left to the ASGI app, the implementation of the server will be much easier, and we can build a prototype server from here. After all, the server is called by the ASGI application. If the ASGI application runs fine, there will be no problem. The server only needs to check the necessary fields for sending data.

Author: > The server only needs to check the necessary fields for sending data.

The server SHOULD let the client knows the trailing headers it will be sending, as I've mentioned above:

> An HTTP/1.1 message SHOULD include a Trailer header field in a
message using chunked transfer-coding with a non-empty trailer. Doing
so allows the recipient to know which header fields to expect in the
trailer.

I think you're right, the server should not care if the trailing headers keys were sent in the `http.response.start`. But... The ASGI application SHOULD send them.

About the "multiple `http.response.trailers` messages": If that's allowed, then we need a field to allow the server to understand it has more. I guess `more_body` it's the candidate field here...

> An ASGI framework interested in sending trailing headers to the client, must include
> the ``Trailer`` header in the ``http.response.start``. That will allow the ASGI server
> to know that after the last ``http.response.body`` message (``more_body`` being ``False``),
> the ASGI framework will send a ``http.response.trailers`` message.

Author: ```suggestion
An ASGI framework interested in sending trailing headers should include the ``Trailer`` header
in the *Response Start*, as mentioned in the [RFC 2616](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2616.html#section-14.40).

The ASGI framework that wants to send trailing headers can send multiple *Response Body* messages,
but the last one should set ``more_body`` as ``True``. This will tell the ASGI server to wait for
more messages, on which the ASGI framework can send multiple ``http.response.trailers`` messages.
The last ``http.response.trailers`` on its turn should set ``more_body`` as ``False``.
```

Reviewer 2: The ```more_body```  can be ``False`` by default if not exists, just follow the one in ```http.response.body```

Reviewer 2: So multiple ``http.response.trailers`` messages is allowed, but if you just want to send one, you may not to add ``more_body`` field. This is what ``http.response.body`` did.

Author: Yeah, that field is False by default, as mentioned below.

Reviewer: I think that multiple `http.response.trailers` messages is an unnecessary complication - headers are unlikely to be streamed and I don't believe it makes sense to send more body after the trailers. Therefore I'd leave it for the ASGI app to figure out what trailers to send and have a single message sent to the server.

Author: @pgjones Then the server needs to be aware that the trailing headers are going to be present on `http.response.start`, and `more_body` is not needed on `http.response.trailers` (what is currently commited).

Then are we fine on saying that the ASGI framework MUST send the `Trailer` header in the `http.response.start`?

Reviewer: I think so - does the ASGI app need to give a value equal to the headers it intends to send as well?

Reviewer 2: > I think that multiple http.response.trailers messages is an unnecessary complication 

Actually when you are using [h11](https://pypi.org/project/h11/), there is only one chance to send trailer: the end of response body.  So it's ok for servers which only support http/1.1. But when it comes to http/2, things changed. Mutiple trailers is allowed, and, to be honest, I spend quite a lot time thinking trailers under http/2, and found that may need some [tricky](https://github.com/nonebot/nonecorn/issues/11). I have no idea if it's allowed.

Author: > I think so - does the ASGI app need to give a value equal to the headers it intends to send as well?

In case the ASGI app doesn't send the `Trailer` header, how does the server can be aware when the response is completed? 

On the `uvicorn` PR mentioned on the description, it uses a new field `trailers` on the `http.response.start`. On the `nonecorn` implementation, it makes use of the `more_body` on `http.response.body` and `http.response.trailers`.

Reviewer: I agree with the ASGI app only needing to include a `Trailer` header, my question was if the server should check the values of that header against the trailers sent.

Author: Ah! I would naively say "no". As the RFC mentioned above says, the server SHOULD (and not MUST) send the `Trailer` header, I don't think it's necessary for the server to make sure the trailings headers are the same as the ones in the `Trailer` header.

Should I clarify this in the spec?

Keys:

* ``type`` (*Unicode string*): ``"http.response.trailers"``

* ``headers`` (*Iterable[[byte string, byte string]]*): An iterable of
  ``[name, value]`` two-item iterables, where ``name`` is the header name, and
  ``value`` is the header value. Header names must be lowercased. Pseudo

>   headers (present in HTTP/2 and HTTP/3) must not be present.

Author: ```suggestion
  headers (present in HTTP/2 and HTTP/3) must not be present.
  
* ``more_body`` (*bool*): Signifies if there is additional content
  to come (as part of a Response Body message). If ``False``, response
  will be taken as complete and closed, and any further messages on
  the channel will be ignored. Optional; if missing defaults to
  ``False``.
```

Reviewer 2: Yes, exactly.

Reviewer 2: I have changed nonecorn to adapt this spec, and with a [simple test app](https://gist.github.com/synodriver/66abc632f42f75e6b05ef60aa3a484d8). I tested it with curl and looks fine.

Author: Thanks @synodriver 🙏 Let's see what others have to say here. If everything is fine, I'll commit those 2 suggestions above.

The ASGI server will only send the trailing headers in case the client has sent the

> ``TE: trailers`` header in the request.

Reviewer: Should the server error on receipt of this message without the `TE: trailers` header or just silently not send the trailing headers?

Author: I think it should be more on the "silently not send" side.

Reviewer 2: > Should the server error on receipt of this message without the `TE: trailers` header or just silently not send the trailing headers?

In my implementation, the protocol server just send trailers when it receive that event. I think it's the responsibility of the asgi application to decide whether to send or not. So I don't have ```trailer``` field in ```http.response.start```. If you want to send, just send.

Reviewer 3: I did it the same way in my separate PR. I agree the responsibility should be on the asgi app
